CHAPTER VIII.
THE REFLECTIVE MOOD. The exercise of concentrating the mind, to which at
least half an hour a day should be given, is a mere preliminary, like scales on the
piano. Having acquired power over that most unruly member of one's complex
organism, one is naturally to put it to the yoke. Useless to possess an obedient
mind, unless one profits to the furthest possible degree by its obedience. A
prolonged primary course of study is indicated. Now as to what this course of
study should be, cannot be any question. There never has been any question. All
the sensible people of all ages are agreed upon it, and it is not literature,
nor is it any other art, nor is it history, nor is it any science. It is the
study of one's self. Man, know thyself. These words are so hackneyed that
verily I blush to write them. Yet they must be written, for they need to be
written. I take back my blush, being ashamed of it. Man, know thyself. I say it
out loud. The phrase is one of those phrases with which everyone is familiar,
of which everyone acknowledges the value, and which only the most sagacious put
into practice. I don't know why. I am entirely convinced that what is more
than anything else lacking in the life of the averaged well-intentioned man of
today is the reflective mood. We do not reflect. I mean that we do not reflect
upon genuinely important things, upon the problem of our happiness, upon the
main direction in which we are going, upon what life is giving to us, upon the
share which reason has, or has not, in determining our actions, and upon the
relation between our principles and our conduct. And yet you are in search of
happiness, are you not? Have you discovered it? The chances are that you
have not. The chances are that you have already come to believe that happiness
is unattainable. But men have attained it, and they have attained it by
realizing that happiness does not spring from the procuring of physical or mental
pleasure, but from the development of reason and the adjustment of conduct to
principles. I suppose that you will not have the audacity to deny this, and if
you admit it, and still devote no part of your day to the deliberate consideration
of your reason, principles, and conduct, you admit also that while striving for a
certain thing you are regularly leaving undone the one act which is necessary to
the attainment of that thing. Now, shall I blush, or will you? Do not fear that I
mean to thrust certain principles upon your attention. I care not, in this place,
what your principles are. Your principles may induce you to believe in the
righteousness of burglary. I don't mind. All I urge is that a life in which
conduct does not fairly well accord with principles is a silly life, and that
conduct can only be made to accord with principles by means of daily
examination, reflection, and resolution. What leads to the permanent sorrowfulness
of burglars is that their principles are contrary to burglary. If they
genuinely believed in the moral excellence of burglary, penal servitude
would simply mean so many happy years for them. All martyrs are happy because
their conduct and their principles agree. As for reason, which makes conduct and is
not unconnected with the making of principles, it plays a far smaller part
in our lives than we fancy. We are supposed to be reasonable, but we are much
more instinctive than reasonable, and the less we reflect, the less reasonable we
shall be. The next time you get cross with the waiter because your steak is
overcooked, ask reason to step into the cabinet room of your mind and consult
her. She will probably tell you that the waiter did not cook the steak and had no
control over the cooking of the steak, and that even if he alone was to blame,
you accomplished nothing good by getting cross, you merely lost your dignity,
looked a fool in the eyes of sensible men, and soured the waiter while
producing no effect whatever on the steak. The result of this consultation
with reason, for which she makes no charge, will be that when once more your
steak is overcooked you will treat the waiter as a fellow creature, remain quite
calm in a kindly spirit, and politely insist on having a fresh steak. The gain
will be obvious and solid. In the formation or modification of principles
and the practice of conduct, much help can be derived from printed books issued
at six pence each and upwards. I mentioned in my last chapter Marcus
Aurelius and Epictetus. Certain even more widely known works will occur at
once to the memory. I may also mention Pascal, La Prière, and Emerson. For
myself you do not catch me travelling without my Marcus Aurelius. Yes, books
are valuable, but not reading of books will take the place of a daily, candid,
honest examination of what one has recently done and what one is about to
do, of a steady looking at oneself in the face, disconcerting though the
sight may be. When shall this important business be accomplished? The
solitude of the evening journey home appears to me to be suitable for it. A
reflective mood naturally follows the exertion of having earned the day's
living. Of course if, instead of attending to an elementary and profoundly
important duty, you prefer to read the paper, which you might just as well read
while waiting for your dinner, I have nothing to say. But attend to it at some
time of the day, you must. I now come to the evening hours. End of chapter.